Monitoring for [http://incubator.apache.org/cloudstack/ Apache CloudStack] and by extension, [http://www.citrix.com/products/cloudplatform/overview.html Citrix CloudPlatform].

The easiest way to start monitoring CloudStack is to navigate to the Infrastructure page, click the *+* menu to add a device and choose ''Add CloudStack''. Fill out the ''URL'', ''API Key'', and ''Secret Key'' fields then click ''OK''. The URL should only include the protocol, host and port (i.e. ''http://cloudstack.example.com/''). You can find or create the keys by logging into the CloudStack web interface and navigate to Accounts and users.

Zenoss will then add the CloudStack device to the system. For root administrator users, the associated zones, pods, clusters, hosts, system VMs, routers and VMs will also be added; zones, routers and VMs for domain admonistrator users; zones and VMs for all non admonistrator users. Monitoring will also start after the discovery is complete.

{{#widget:YouTube|id=3hr2H9iMz_o|width=600}}

== Upgrade Notes ==

If you are upgrading from a version earlier than 1.1.3 you will need to perform the following manual steps after upgrading to fix the collection of network throughput metrics. These steps must be performed on any Zenoss collector server monitoring CloudStack. These steps will remove all historical performance data collected for network throughput, but that matters less because the historical data is completely wrong. If you do not perform these steps, the network data collected after upgrading will continue to be wrong.

{{note}} These steps are only necessary on Zenoss versions earlier than 5.0.

<syntaxhighlight lang="bash">
su - zenoss
cd $ZENHOME/perf/Devices
find . -name cloudstack_network\*.rrd -delete
</syntaxhighlight>

== Metrics ==

Once you've successfully added a CloudStack cloud to Zenoss you will begin to see the following metrics available for the entire cloud for root administrator users. These numbers are aggregated from all zones, pods, clusters and hosts.

* Public IPs: Total and Used
* Private IPs: Total and Used
* Memory: Total (with and without over-provisioning), Allocated and Used
* CPU: Total (with and without over-provisioning), Allocated and Used
* Primary Storage: Total (with and without over-provisioning), Allocated and Used
* Secondary Storage: Total and Used
* Network: Read and Write


The same list of metrics are available for each zone for root administrator users. The same metrics with the exception of public IPs and secondary storage are also available for each pod.

The following metrics are available aggregated to each cluster, and for each host.

* Memory: Total and Used
* CPU: Total (with and without over-provisioning), Allocated, Used and Cores
* Network: Read and Write

== Events ==

CloudStack has both alerts and events. Once you've successfully added a CloudStack cloud to Zenoss you will automatically receive all CloudStack alerts as events in Zenoss. You will also automatically receive all CloudStack events. However, the events will go straight into your event history by default.

To avoid overloading CloudStack and Zenoss, only the last two (2) days of events will be checked. This allows for timezone discrepency between the Zenoss and CloudStack servers as well as some downtime without missing events. There is no real-time event collection mechanism with the CloudStack API, so alerts and events will only be polled once per minute.

== Installed Items ==

Installing the ZenPack will add the following items to your Zenoss system.

;Device Classes
* /CloudStack

;Configuration Properties
* zCloudStackURL
* zCloudStackAPIKey
* zCloudStackSecretKey

;Modeler Plugins
* zenoss.CloudStack

;Monitoring Templates
* Cloud
* Zone
* Pod
* Cluster
* Host
* VirtualMachine

;Event Classes
* /Status/CloudStack
* /Perf/CloudStack
* /App/CloudStack

== Changes ==

;1.2.0
* Hide API secret key (ZEN-21404)
* Allow devices to be created for domain administrator users, non-administrator users.

;1.1.3
* Fix monitoring of network throughput metrics. (ZEN-16956)

;1.1.2
* Fix conflict with SolarisMonitor 2.2.0.
